---
layout: default
section: Example
permalink: /katex/
maths: true
title: Using Katex
---

[Circle theorems]({% post_url /example/circles/2021-03-01-circle-theorems-intro %})

## Hello KaTex!

This is my first attempt to combine Jekyll and KaTex. I'm using the [simple guide to using KaTex](https://sixthform.info/KaTex/guide.html) and several other resources. Another page will explain how I've successfully got this to work, while this one sets out some example formulae and a standard proof.

### Example: formulae aligned at equals sign

<div>
\[
\begin{aligned}
\int_0^1\frac{x^4(1-x)^4}{1+x^2}\,dx &=\frac{22}{7}-\pi\\ \\
\int_{-\infty}^\infty e^{-x^2}\,dx &=\sqrt{\pi}
\end{aligned}
\]
</div>

### Formula: inline mode

<div>The well known Pythagorean theorem \(x^2 + y^2 = z^2\) was proved to be invalid for other exponents. This means that \(x^n + y^n = z^n\) has no integer solutions for n > 2.</div>

<h3>Proving \(\sqrt{2}\) is irrational - inline proof</h3>

<p>Let's start by assuming the reverse: that \(\sqrt{2}\) is rational. We can set \(\sqrt{2}\ = a/b\) where \(a\) and \(b\) are positive integers, with no common factor. Multiplying up we have \(\sqrt{2}b = a\). Squaring gives \(2b^2 = a^2\). The left hand side is even, so \(a^2\) must also be even. This means \(a\) is even, because if \(a\) was odd \(a^2\) would be too. So let \(a = 2c\). Then \(2b^2 = a^2 = 4c^2\) which gives \(b^2 = 2c^2\). As before, this means that \(b\) is even. Therefore \(a\) and \(b\) are both even, so have 2 as a common factor, contradicting out initial deduction. We conclude that our original assumption, that \(\sqrt{2}\) was rational, was wrong.</p>

<h3>Proving \(\sqrt{2}\) is irrational - display proof</h3>

<div>
<p>Proof by contradiction: assume that \(\sqrt{2}\) is rational. </p>
<!-- Initial ? in ?\text is a hack; without it the first symbol disappears -->
\[\begin{alignedat}
?\sqrt{2} &= a/b && \text{ with }a \text{ and } b \text{\ { positive integers with no common factor}} & (1) \\

\sqrt{2}b &= a &&\text{\ {multiplying by b}} & (2) \\

2b^2 &= a^2 &&\text{\ {squaring both sides}} & (3) \\

&\text{\ {Deduce }} a \text{\ {is even}} && \text{\ {if }} a \text{\ {were odd so would be }} a^2 \text{\ {and hence }} 2b^2 & (4) \\

&\text{\ {Set }} a = 2c && \text{\ {as }} a \text{\ {is even}}& (5) \\

2b^2 &= 4c^2 && \text{\ {substituting (5) into (3)}} & (6) \\

b^2 &= 2c^2 && \text{\ {simplifying}} & (7) \\

&\text{\ {Deduce}} && \text{\ {by the same argument as in (5) }}b \text{\ {is even}} & (8) \\

&\text{\ {Deduce}} && \text{\ {from (5) and (8), a and b have a common factor of 2}} & (9)\\

&\text{\ {Note}} && \text{\ {this contradicts (1).}} & (10)\\

&\text{\ {Conclude}} && \text{\ {the original rationality assumption was wrong}} & (11)\\

\end{alignedat}\]
</div>

This proof may look pretty, with its clever alignments, but that comes with a cost.

<div>Most obviously, a lot more screen space is taken up versus the first proof. Less obviously, it's technically a little challenging to get all the alignment working. The most awkward part is aligning the comments, which themselves reference symbols; comments should not confuse \(a\) with a.</div>

We could avoid part of the problem by not using letters such as a, whose appearance may differ according to the font used. But was the full display presentation really necessary? Most of the numbered lines were not referred. The elementary proof is quite suited to a fully inline presentation.

Let's present a hybrid layout and deploy the technique for a more challenging proof.

<h3>Proving \(\sqrt{2}\) is irrational - hybrid</h3>

<p>We attempt a proof by contradiction. Assume that \(\sqrt{2}\) is rational, so that we can set:</p>

<div>
\[\begin{aligned}
\sqrt{2} = a / b && (1) \\
\end{aligned}\]
</div>

<p>where \(a\) and \(b\) are positive integers <b>with no common factor</b>. We can simplify to:</p>

<div>
\[\begin{aligned}
2b^2 = a^2 && (2) \\
\end{aligned}\]
</div>

<p>Since the LHS of (2) is even so is the RHS i.e. \(a^2\) is even. This means that \(a\) is even, because if \(a\) were odd \(a^2\) would be odd. We can therefore set \(a = 2c\). Substituting into (2) we get \(2b^2 = 4c^2\), so that \(b^2 = 2c^2\). By the reasoning following (2) we know that \(b\) is even.</p>

<p>We have seen that both \(a\) and \(b\) are even i.e. they have a common factor of 2. This contradicts the "no common factor" point following (1). <b>The only way out is that\(\sqrt{2}\) is not rational after all.</b></p>

<h3>Lemma: if p is prime and \(p\mid mn \) then \(p\mid m \) or \(p\mid n \)</h3>

<p>LaTex's has \divides. KaTex <a href="https://KaTex.org/docs/support_table.html#d">does not support</a> this, so I used \mid - found using <a href="https://detexify.kirelabs.org/classify.html">Detexify</a> with |.</p>

<p>We use a proof by contradiction.</p>

<p>Let the prime p be the <b>smallest</b> counter-example i.e. where there are positive integers \( m \) and \( n \) such that \(p\mid mn \) but \(p\nmid m \) and \(p\nmid n \).</p>

<p>Due to non-division we can set \(m = q_1p + r_1 \) and \(n = q_2p + r_2 \) where \(0 < r_i < p\, (1) \)</p>

<p>\(p\mid mn \) = \( (q_1p + r_1)(q_2p + r_2) = q_1q_2p^2 + (q_1+q_2)p + r_1r_2 \).</p>

<p>By subtraction, \(p\mid r_1r_2 \) but \(p\nmid r_1 \) and \(p\nmid r_2 \). We may additionally take \(r_1 \) and \(r_2 \) to be the smallest such values i.e. <b>where the product \(r_1r_2\) is smallest.</b></p>

<p>We can write \( k_1p = r_1r_2 \), where \( k_1 < p\) as \( r_1r_2 < p^2\).</p>

<p>We cannot have \( k_1 = 1 \) as that would give a non-trivial factorization of \( p \).</p>

<p>Now as \( k_1 > 1 \) let \( p_1 \) be any prime factor of \( k_1 \). Then \(p_1\mid r_1r_2 \) and, by the minimality of \( p \) we must have \(p_1\mid r_1 \) or \(p_1\mid r_2 \). Without loss of generality we assume \(p_1\mid r_1 \) i.e. \( r_3 = r_1/p_1\) is an integer.</p>

<p>We can rewrite \( k_1p = r_1r_2 \) as \( k_2p = r_3r_2 \) where \( k_2 = k_1 / p_1 \) and again \( 0 < r_i < p\).</p>

Now we have two cases:

<p><b>Case 1. </b>If \( k_2 = 1 \) we have a non-trivial factorization of the prime \( p\).</p>

<p><b>Case 2. </b>If \( p \mid r_3r_2 \) we know \( p \nmid r_2 \) so, by minimality, \( p \mid r_3  \). But this means \( p \mid r_1 = p_1r_3 \).</p>

### Three alignments example

<div>
\[\begin{alignedat}
 y & =    d & z & =1\\
y & = cx+d & z & =x+1\\
y_{12} & =bx^{2}+cx+d & z & =x^{2}+x+1 \\
y(x) & =ax^{3}+bx^{2}+cx+d & z & =x^{3}+x^{2}+x+1
\end{alignedat}\]
</div>

See the [KaTex support table](https://KaTex.org/docs/support_table.html).

### Formula: display mode

<blockquote>
  <p>inline: \(f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\)</p>

  <p>display mode (centered):</p>

\[f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\]

</blockquote>

## Jekyll, Markdown and KaTex working together

Initially I thought I had a problem getting Jekyll and KaTex to work together. I now believe the problem is between markdown and KaTex, possibly with a similar issue for markdown and LaTex.

I need to have an additional maths template which includes links to Javascript files (required by KaTex) without duplicating initial elements e.g. the <code>HEAD</code>.

### Using front matter to conditionally load KaTex resources
Using
<pre><code>---
layout: default
folder: /content/maths/
title: New maths
maths: true
---</code></pre>

### Producing formulae

**My first attempt** as [recommended by Guillaume Endignoux](https://gendignoux.com/blog/2020/05/23/KaTex.html)

<pre><code>$$f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi$$</code></pre>

produces nothing. I've read about conflicts using \$$. Anyway, I've not [set up the $$ delimiters](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27375252/how-can-i-render-all-inline-formulas-in-with-KaTex)

**My second attempt** uses widely recommended syntax:

<pre><code>\[f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\]</code></pre>
but produces this:

\[f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\]

I'm guessing the problem is something in Jekyll or KaTex on how (or whether) to parse markdown.

**My last and successful attempt** was a div hack:

<pre><code>&lt;div>\[f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\]&lt;/div></code></pre>
produces this:

<div>\[f(x) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty \hat f(\xi)\,e^{2 \pi i \xi x} \,d\xi\]</div>
